Subject: Change in Thesis submission policy for Old Ph.D. student's registered before 
July 2019 
This has reference to the 19t Senate held on 098 December 2020 regarding the above mentioned 
subject. The Senate recommended the following: 
“The Senate has discussed the proposal and approved the implementation of timeline as per new 
regulation w.e.f. July 2019 for thesis submission 
for Old Ph.D. students registered before July 2019.” 

Subject: Continuation of Assistantship to Ph.D. students till Thesis Defense 
This has reference to the 22"¢ Academic Committee held on 27% April 2020 regarding the above 
mentioned subject. The Academic Committee recommended the following: 
“The AC deliberated on the matter and noted that as per the MHRD notification the total tenure as JRF 
plus SRF should not exceed five years and there is no clarity whether to continue fellowship after 
submission of thesis. As per UGC guidelines (page no.4, point no 5) the fellowship will be granted upto 
date of submission of Ph.D. thesis or 5 years whichever is earlier. As per VSS guidelines: the maximum 
period of support to the PhD fellowship under " Visvesvaraya PhD scheme " is 5 years or Ph.D. 
completion whichever is earlier. 
The AC has recommended that the fellowship to PhD students will continue till Thesis Defense or end of 
the semester in which he/she has submitted the thesis, whichever is earlier.”

Subject: Regarding extension of one months for M.Sc. and M.Tech. students for Project/ 
Thesis work 
With reference to the above captioned subject it is submitted that 20! Senate accorded approval 
for the following: 
"Second-year students of M.Tech. and M.Sc. can complete the thesis evaluation through the 
online viva-voce examination by 30 July 2020. Students may opt to wait to complete the 
remaining part of the project at the campus and subsequently complete the viva-voce 
examination. All students who cannot complete the examination by 30 July 2020 due to genuine 
reasons will be required to apply for an extension with the recommendation of the supervisor.” 
In view of the above, Office of Academics has received applications for extension of one month 
for M.Sc. and M.Tech. students for Project/ Thesis work with recommendation of Supervisor due 
to current Covid-19 outbreak across India which has created extraordinary situations. 
In this regard following approval have been accorded: 
1. 
2. 
To give one month extension to Second year M.Sc. and M.Tech. students for their 
Project/ Thesis work till 31st August 2020. 
Students not able to complete their Project/Thesis work till 31st August 2020 have to 
register for A.Y. 2020-21 Semester I and have to pay 50% Tuition and Semester fee. 
The approval has been accorded without Assistantship/Fellowship beyond permissible time 
limit.

Subject: Online Submission of Final Thesis after defense for M.Sc. and M.Tech. students 
With reference to the above cited subject, the Competent Authority has approved the 
following arrangements: 
1. Thesis to be submitted through online mode developed by Office of Academics. A detailed 
SOP is attached as Annexure I. 
2. 
3. 
It is mandatory for the M.Sc. and M.Tech. students to provide the hard copies (at any 
earliest possible date before the award of degrees) of the final thesis to the Department 
Office. The department office may retain two copy (Copy of the Thesis for Supervisor(s), 
Copy of the Thesis for Department record). Third copy of the Thesis for Library Records 
along with CD to be submitted to Office of Academics through department office only. 
Department office will send the original signed Hard copy of the thesis defense form to 
the Office of Academics. 
Important Note: 
Supervisor will submit the final thesis in single pdf (along with signed student declaration and 
supervisor certificate) and defense form to the respective department staff members to upload the 
thesis on the portal. 

Subject: Regarding Publication requirement for Submission of Ph.D. Thesis 
With reference to the above cited subject, the Competent Authority has approved the 
following: 
The submission of Ph.D. Thesis would require at least two publications in Scopus indexed journals 
and/or A+ conferences for Engineering and Science Departments. Requirements for the Department of 
Humanities and School of Management & Entrepreneurship will be specified separately. 
The above will be applicable to al] existing Ph.D. students who are yet to submit their Ph.D. 
thesis.

Subject: Registration Kept Alive for M.Tech, M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D. Students 
As per the Rules & Regulations (For Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards), 
Clause no. 21.1.1 
Registration Kept Alive (RKA): - 
“A student admitted to an M. Tech program who has at least completed minimum credit 
requirement of the first semester, can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any 
professional activity, by opting for RKA in subsequent semesters. The candidate must indicate his 
intent of RKA before the last date of late registration through DRC to Dean(academic). The 
candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for RKA status. A student can maintain RKA 
status for a maximum of 6 semesters”. 
As per Clause no. 21.5 
Maximum Duration of a Program: - 
“M. Tech. (Regular and Part-time/External/Executive) - 12 registered semesters which may 
include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after completion of the first 
semester. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored candidates”. 
“Ph.D. and M. Tech.-Ph.D. dual degree (Regular and Part-time/External) - 14 registered 
semesters which may include maximum 6 semesters of Registration kept Alive (RKA) after 
completion of the two semesters. Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored candidates. 
Students may request for RKA to Dean (Academics) through DRC”. 
In this regard, the competent authority approved the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Tuition fee as per fee structure of respective programme only be charged during 
the Registration Kept Alive period. 
Tuition fee post RKA will be same as that of sponsored candidate including 
semester fee. 
Tuition and semester fee for Executive category will be same in post RKA.

Subject: Conducting Comprehensive Examination and State of the Art Seminar of the Student Ph.D. 
and M.Tech.-Ph.D. Students registered from July 2019 onwards 
With reference to conducting comprehensive examination and state of the art seminar the 
following amendments have been made in the current Academic Regulations for students registered 
from July 2019 onwards: 
1. 
| Comprehensive 
Examination 
2. | State of the Art 
Important Notes: 
1. 
Clause 26.5.1, of the regulations for Students registered from July 2019 
onwards; 
Comprehensive Examination to be completed by the students: 
e Ph.D. : within 3 semesters 
e Direct Ph.D. and MTech - PhD Dual Degree: within 5 semesters 
Last Date for Conducting Comprehensive Examination 
July Session 
January Session 
For Ph.D. - 31 December (within 3 | For Ph.D. - 31 July (within 3 
semesters) 
semesters) 
For Direct Ph.D. and MTech - PhD | For Direct Ph.D. and MTech - PhD 
Dual Degree - 31 December (within | Dual Degree 31 July (within 5 
5 Semester) 
Semester) 
Clause 26.5, Qualifier requirements of Ph.D. Student: 
The Ph. D. students are normally expected to complete successfully the 
Qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester of 
his/her registration in the Ph. D. program and in any case not later than the 
beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the Ph. D. program. 
Part-time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement 
before the beginning 
of the seventh semester. 
Last Date for Conducting State of the Art (SOTA) 
July Session 
January Session 
For Ph.D. - 31 December (within 3 | For Ph.D. - 31 July (within 3 
semesters) 
semesters) 
For Part-time Ph.D. - 31 December | For Part-time Ph.D. - 31 July (within 
(within 5 semesters) 
5 semesters) 
Astudent can appear in the comprehensive examination before he/she has completed the course 
requirements and satisfied the minimum specified CGPA requirement. 
2. 
State of the Art seminar must be completed before finalization of the research proposal. 
This has issued with the approval of the Competent Authority. 

Subject: Rules and Regulations for conduct and Evaluation of M.Tech/M.Sc. Project joined on 
or after July 2019 
In continuation to rules and regulations to evaluate the M.Sc./M. Tech. project under the 
trimester system the competent authority approved the following: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
In trimester I continuation grade will be awarded by the respective supervisor. 
Mid term evaluation in the mid of the trimester 274 on 18t Jan 2021 will be conducted 
based on project presentation to award the letter grade to M.Sc. and M.Tech. students 
for their project work which is equivalent to Semester I evaluation. Mid- 
term evaluation in the middle of the trimester II may correspond to 6 credits which 
would be for M. Tech Project Trimester I (3 credits) + Trimester II (3 credits) and 5 credit 
which would be for M.Sc. Project Trimester I (5 credits) . Continuation grade may be 
awarded at the end of trimester II to M.Sc. and M.Tech. students for their project work. 
Final report will be submitted at the end of the trimester III and accordingly based on 
the final presentation and report the remaining credit except trimester I and trimester II 
of grade will be awarded to M.Sc. and M.Tech. students for their project work by conduct 
and evaluation committee of M.Tech. /M.Sc. project. The Chairman DRC of respective 
department will upload the grades at the New Aryabhata portal. 

Subject: Comprehensive, SOTA & Qualifier requirements for M. Tech.-Ph.D. and Part Time Ph.D. 
students 
In addition to the regulations (For Students enrolled from July 2019 onwards) clause 26.5 the 
Comprehensive, SOTA and Qualifier requirements for M. Tech.-Ph.D. and Part Time Ph.D. students is as 
under: 
1. 
N 
3. 
4, 
5. 
6. 
oN 
9, 
The 16 credits associated with the M. Tech Projects are to be converted to the Research Proposal 
credits for the Dual Degree students. They need not register for additional Research Proposal 
courses. They still need to appear for a Research Proposal presentation that should include a 
plan of PhD work 
The Comprehensive Examination must be cleared before SOTA. 
The Dual Degree students need to complete comprehensive examination and SOTA within 4 
semesters of their registration (31st July for July admission and 31st December for December 
admission). 
The Qualifier requirements must be completed before the beginning of the 5th semester for Dual 
Degree students. Only in special cases subject to approval the same can be completed by 5" 
Semester. 
The SRC should evaluated the 1 presentation (M.Tech. Project Part 1) of the dual degree 
students. Mid Term evaluation in the mid of second trimester on 18 Jan 2021 will be considered 
as the 1s presentation. 
The Final presentation (M. Tech project part 2) will be the research proposal defense for dual 
degree students which will be evaluated by SRC. This can be completed only after the successful 
completion of comprehensive examination and SOTA. 
For Dual Degree students no separate committee other than SRC is to be formed for evaluation. 
A Continuation grade will be awarded until the successful defense of the research proposal. 
The Dual degree students need to submit a report of maximum 10 pages approved by the SRC 
Committee to the office of academics. 
10. For Part Time PhD students, the comprehensive examination must be completed within 4 
semesters (31st July for July admission and 31st December for December admission) and SOTA 
within 5 semesters (31st December for July admission and 31st July for December admission). 
11. Comprehensive dates for A.Y. 2021 from January to July is April 26 to 30 April 2021. 
This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.


Subject: Rules and Regulations for conduct _and_ Evaluation of M.Tech/M. Tech.- 
Ph.D/M.Sc./M.Sc.-M. Tech. Project for the students who joined on or after July 2019 
In continuation to earlier Circular No. ITJ/OA/Circular/2020-21/8/1576 dated 27 
October 2020, the following procedure is to be followed to evaluate the M. Tech./M. Tech.- 
Ph.D./M.Sc./M.Sc.-M.Tech. project under the trimester system: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The mid-term project evaluation of M.Sc. (M.Sc. project part-I of credit 5), M. Tech. and 
dual degree M. Tech.-Ph.D. (M. Tech. project part-I of credit 6) has been scheduled during 
18th-23rd January 2021. 
The DRC of respective department can schedule the presentations to conduct the same 
within the said timeline. For M.Sc. and M. Tech. students, the committees have already 
been formed as per regulation. The SRC will evaluate the project for the dual degree M. 
Tech.-Ph.D. students. 
The presentation and the submitted report will be evaluated as per the following 
parameters 
SN 
1__| 
2 
3 
| Problem formulation 
Component 
Literature Survey 
| Understanding of the problem by the candidate (to be 
judged by Q&A) 
4 _| Initial results (experimental or numerical/ analytical) 
Total 
Weightage 
(Maximum in %) 
30 
25 
25 
20 
100 
The committee will award the marks after evaluation and allocate a tentative letter 
grade. The DRC will ensure that the award of letter grade will be as per the relative 
grading policy. The moderated letter grades by the DRC for individual student will be 
entered in dully signed Form-A-23 (M.Sc. and M.Tech.)/Form-A-24. (Dual degree 
M.Tech.-Ph.D) and submitted to the Office of Academics. 
4. 
The student must attach a plagiarism report along with the project report of maximum 10 
pages. 
This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority. 