Code of Conduct
!. INTRODUCTION
IIT Jodhpur is required to develop technical human resources that are assets to the
country. Students undergo major transitions during their stay at the Institute, especially the
undergraduate students, who need to grow from girls and boys to ladies and gentlemen, and
also develop fundamental understanding of the discipline they have enrolled to study. And, a
critical trait that they need to internalize is the discipline of mind, without which their training
is incomplete to be able to face the real world respectfully and objectively.
It is required that each student of IIT Jodhpur is given a Code of Conduct to observe;
each student should follow the procedures laid therein, and strive to internalize the same at
the earliest. This document describes some of the salient aspects of the said Code of Conduct.
In general, any behavior that negatively affects the progress and/or smooth functioning of
the Institute (including life of a fellow stakeholder of the Institute) constitutes violation of the
Code of Conduct. In all matters of discipline, the norms presented in this document shall
stand as a reference document. Should there be newer situations than those articulated in this
document, the decision of the Committee constituted to review the same, shall form the basis
for the Institute administration to take an objective decision on the matter.
2. THE CODE OF CONDUCT
Each student shall conduct herself or himself in a manner befitting the dignity of IIT
Jodhpur, an institute of national importance. Each student is expected to be involved only in
such activities that are likely to maintain the prestige of the Institute. Each student shall show
due respect and courtesy to staff members, faculty members, and administrators, and due
affection to fellow students. Due attention and courtesy shall be paid to visitors to the
Institute and all residents of the Campus.
Some of the desirable traits of students include: courtesy and decorum; becoming
conduct (both within and outside the Institute); not damaging and/or removing Institute
property or belongings of fellow students; allowing fellow students to pursue their studies
without disturbance; adopting only fair means during examinations; embracing with grace
the rules and regulations of the Institute; and calm and seemly behaviour. It is enjoined upon
all students to abide by all rules and regulations, formulated and implemented by various
bodies and offices of the Institute. Some salient aspects of the Code of Conduct pertaining to
different aspects of student life are discussed in sections below.
2.1 Ragging
Ragging in any form is a serious offense. Any conduct by a student or a group of them,
whether by words spoken or written, or by an act, which has the effect of teasing, treating or
handling with rudeness a fresher or any other student, will be treated as ragging. Further,
2
asking any student to do any act, which that student objects to do and which has the effect of
causing or generating a sense of shame, torment or embarrassment (adversely affecting the
physique or psyche of the student) will be treated as ragging. All such cases will be dealt with
as per the Guidelines given by the Supreme Court of India. More details on what constitutes
ragging and the measures that need to be taken to eliminate it, are placed on the Institute
website.
2.2 Sexual Harassment
Utmost care needs to be taken by each student, to ensure that his/her behavior is
impeccable towards persons of opposite gender. In particular, any unwelcome behavior
towards female students and employees, whether spoken, written, gestural or physical,
directly or indirectly, would be dealt with as per the national law on Prohibition of Sexual
Harassment at work places. Harassment includes, but is not limited to, striking, laying hands
upon, intimidation, threatening with violence or doing bodily harm or invasion of privacy. It
can be of verbal nature and include suggestive comments, insults, humour and jokes about
sex or gender-specific traits, and sexual propositions, whether done directly or through email
or any other mode of communication.
2.3 Interaction with Media
No student is allowed to interact with media persons, whether from the print, radio,
television or online industry, to convey any kind of information about the Institute. Whereas
students are free to publish works of fiction or write-ups on scientific or cultural matters in
newspapers and magazines (print, audio, video or online), no publication is allowed on
political or any controversial matters. Students wishing to publish, in print, audio, video or
online, on student activities, like festivals, are required to obtain prior permission in writing.
2.4 Presence in Social Networking Sites and Other Online Activities
Whereas students are free to host their profiles in networking sites, no student is
allowed to make any claim to represent the Institute in any manner. No comment, whether
positive or negative, shall be posted about anything related to the Institute in any of the
websites. Internet facility is given by the Institute for educational use only, and should not be
misused. Internet resources are intended only for educational purposes. Each student is
responsible for ensuring that he/she does not violate the Cyber Laws of the country and of
the Institute.
2.5 Hostel Life
Rules and regulations laid down for conduct in Hostels have to be strictly adhered to
by each student. Norms for Hostel Management are available as a separate document. Salient
features of the said document include:
(a) Possession and consumption of alcohol or substances of abuse, and smoking are
strictly banned in both hostel and Institute premises.
(b) No one is allowed to enter the hostel or Institute premises in an inebriated
condition.
(c) Each student is responsible to ensure that hostel property is maintained properly.
3
(d) Each student is expected to make positive contribution to creating and maintaining
an overall ambiance in hostel premises, which is conducive for studies and holistic growth of
students.
(e) Student should return to their hostel by the time announced by the Warden of the
Hostel.
2.6 Conduct at the Institute
At all times, students should be polite amongst themselves and towards staff and
faculty members. Students are bound to comply with guidance and directions of Institute
officials; any disorderly or abusive conduct toward them or interfering in their performing
their duties, is as a serious offense. Equally serious are offenses, like adopting unfair means in
examinations, plagiarism in assignments and dissertations, disrupting classes, falsifying
information to the Institute, forging or altering Institute documents, and damaging Institute
property.
Each student should exercise utmost caution and be on constant vigil to ensure that
his/her behavior does not harm anybody, directly or indirectly, and that laws of the country
are upheld at all times. Further, no student is allowed to be associated with any political party
either directly or indirectly. Behavior of no student should constitute any form of harassment
or treatment that is demeaning, abusive, threatening or alarming, including disparagement
based on an individual’s race, creed, ethnicity, national origin, religion, and gender. Further,
all students are expected to positively contribute in ensuring harmony among all sections of
the Institute community, and take advantage of efforts of Institute towards providing an
atmosphere that conducive for academic excellence and overall development of students.
Further, all students should refrain from making any kind of campaign against the
Institute either individually or collectively. The Institute has established norms and
procedures for addressing any legitimate grievance of students. Any attempt to sidestep the
established procedure by organized activity will be a serious violation of the Code of
Conduct.
2.7 Extra-Curricular Activities
The Institute encourages participation of all students in extra-curricular activities,
without affecting academic performance. It is the responsibility of students to ensure that
their participation in extra-curricular activities does not hamper their studies. Hence,
participation in extra-curricular activities can never be cited as a reason for poor academic
performance. To ensure that it is enjoined that no student with CGPA of less than 6.0/10.0
can hold any office of responsibility, either elected or nominated.
Further, special care should be taken to ensure that no extra-curricular activity
encourages any kind of negative behavior. Students organising festivals should ensure that:
(a) All financial transactions, receipts and expenditure, are duly accounted for; a
detailed financial statement of income and expenditure, duly audited by a Chartered
Accountant shall be submitted, along with all supporting vouchers and a copy of the bank
4
passbook to Coordinator (Students) within 8 weeks of the completion of the festival.
(b) All expenditure is incurred within the budget approved at the start of the financial
year, to avoid any difficulty in settling the bills.
(c) Some funding may be sought from outside agencies or individuals as sponsorship
of festival events. All such funding should be available before the start of the festival. In this
connection, no student should sign any Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) with any
sponsor of any event. All such documents should be signed by an authorized signatory of the
Institute. Even when the authorized signatory signs such a document, it should be examined
to be legally sound, to avoid problems like delayed payment.
(d) No favor is given to sponsor to use the name of the Institute in its promotional
activities.
(e) The register kept in Office of Students Affairs should be updated daily with
information of MoUs signed with sponsors, money received, expenditure made and other
related activities with copies of documents and original bills.
3. DISCIPLINARY ACTION
A student shall invite disciplinary action from the Institute, if he/she violates the Code
of Conduct; the actions may include reprimand, disciplinary probation, fine, debarring from
examinations, withdrawal of scholarship and/or placement services, withholding of grades
and/or degrees, cancellation of registration, and even expulsion from the Institute.
In particular,
(a) Involvement of a student in ragging may lead to his/her expulsion from the
Institute.
(b) The Instructor of a course has the power to debar a student from continuing to
write the rest of the examination, in which he/she is detected to be using unfair means. An
Instructor or Tutor has the power to take appropriate action against a student, who
misbehaves in his or her class; and
(c) The Warden of a Hostel has the power to reprimand, impose fine or take any other
suitable measure against a student resident, who violates either the Code of Conduct or rules
pertaining to the Hostel.
In other cases, the matter shall be reported to the Student Disciplinary Action
Committee duly constituted by the Institute, which shall investigate alleged misdemeanors,
complaints, etc., and recommend suitable course of action to the Chairman, Senate. Violation
of the Code of Conduct by an individual or of a group of students can be referred to this
Committee by a student, staff member, faculty member, official of the Institute or visitor to
the Institute.
In exceptional circumstances, the Chairman, Senate, may appoint a Special Committee
to investigate and recommend appropriate action for any act of gross indiscipline involving
an individual or a number of students, which may tarnish the image of the Institute. The
recommendation for any action shall be referred to the Senate. On all matters, other than
denial of the award of a degree and expulsion of a student from the Institute, the Senate may
5
give its recommendation, and for its final decision. The Senate may recommend a student,
who is found guilty of a major offence, to the Board of Governors, for either expelling the
student from the Institute or not awarding a degree (even though the student may have met
all requirements for the award of the degree).
A student, who feels aggrieved with the punishment awarded, may appeal to the
Chairman, Senate, stating clearly the case and explaining her/his position, and seeking
reconsideration of the decision. 