House Allotment Rules
for Employees of IIT Jodhpur
MGC ericec Mical|
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
May 2017
Table of Contents
page
Scope 5
Definitions 7
1. BASICS 9
1.1 | Types of Houses, Living Area, Grade Pay, and License Fee 9
1.2 | House Allotment Committee 10
1.3 | Period of Retention 11
1.4 | Code of Conduct of Allotees 12
2. ELIGIBILITY 13
2.1 | Eligibility fora House on Campus 13
2.2 | Eligibility of Employees Owning House 13
2.3 | Condition of Allotment and Rules of Occupancy 13
2.4 | Seniority and Eligibility Criteria 15
3. PROCESS 17
3.1 | Normal Allotment 17
3.2 | Out of Turn Allotment 18
3.3 | Forfeiture of Allotment 18
3.4 | Rejection of Allotment 19
3.5 | Allotment to Employees Married to Each Other 19
4. SPECIAL SITUATIONS 21
4.1 | Exemption of License Fee - cum - Rent 21
4.2 | Relaxation of Rules 21
5. MAINTAINENANCE 23
5.1 | Upkeep and Cleaning 23
5.2 | Alterations and Modifications 23
6. VIOLATIONS 25
6.1 | Overstay 25
6.2 | Unauthorized Occupation 26
6.3 | Breach of Rules and Conditions 27
6.4 | Punitive Actions 28
6.5 | Sub-letting 28
6.6 | Housing Allotment Disciplinary Action Committee 28
7- RESOLUTION OF MATTERS 29
7.1 | Appellate Authority 29
7.2 | Rules, Procedures and Matters not covered 29
Scope
These rules shall be read as House Allotment Rules 2017. Further, these rules shall be:
(a) Effective from the date of notification by the Institute;
(b) Apply to all Employees of the Institute and others eligible for residential accommodation
within the Permanent Campus of IIT Jodhpur; and
(c) Supersede all the earlier rules released by the Institute so far.
These rules shall be reviewed in 2 years from the date it comes into force, unless otherwise
circumstances compel and earlier review. Any addition or amendment suggested shall
come into force only after the approval of the Board of Governors of the Institute.
Definitions
For the purpose of these House Allotment Rules and better understanding, unless
otherwise stated in individual occasions, the following terms shall have the meaning as
stated hereunder:
Term Meaning
Allotment Grant of license to occupy a residential accommodation in
accordance with the provision of these House Allotment Rules
Allottee Employee to whom the residential accommodation is allotted
HAC House Allotment Committee, duly appointed by the Institute
HARs Housing Allotment Rules
Director Chief Academic and Administrative Officer of the Institute
Grade Pay (GP) | Payment (as per Rules of 6CPC) associated with level of employment
as granted to an Employee of the Institute
Academic Grade | Grade Pay (as per Rules of 6CPC) as granted to a Faculty Member of
Pay (AGP) the Institute
Entitlement Highest type of accommodation that an employee is eligible under
these rules
Family Spouse, children, step children, legally adopted children, parents,
brothers and sisters, who ordinarily reside with and who are
dependent on the Employee
Institute Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur
License Fee Sum of money payable on monthly basis as compensation for
occupation of a residential accommodation allotted under these
rules. It includes License Fee as per Government of India rules.
Subletting Sharing accommodation by an Allottee with another person with or
without any payment by such other person, but it doesn’t include any
permitting to share accommodation with:
(1) close relation(s) of the Allottee,
(2) Guest(s) visiting the Allottee, or
(3) Others, and as may be notified by the Institute from time to time
Type Sizes of accommodation to which an employee is eligible under
these rules
1.
Basics
This chapter provides primary information related to houses on the Permanent
Campus of IIT Jodhpur.
1.1 Types of Houses, Living Area, Grade Pay, and License Fee
The houses permissible for allocation to persons with different Grade Pay are given as
under:
S.No. | Group of Employee House Living Area GP AGP
Type (m2) (Rs.) (Rs.)
1 Group A Type A 250] 10,000 | HAG 12,000
2 (Faculty Members & Staff Members) Type B 200 8,900 10,000
3 8,700 9,000
4 7,600 8,000
5 6,600 7,000
6 5,400 6,000
7 _| Group B TypeC 100 4,800
8 (Staff Members) 4,600
9 4,200
10 Group C 2,800
11 | (Staff Members) 2,400
12 2,000
& less
13_| Visiting Faculty Members VFMH 60
14 | Project Staff Members PSMH 40
15 | Married Students MSH 40
The associated Rules, which are related to allotment of different houses, are:
(1) License Fee: It is a flat-rate monthly charge payable to the Institute by the Allottee for the
unfurnished residential accommodation made available by the Institute, as per the charges duly
approved by the Institute. This charge shall be based on Living Area. And, it shall be different for
the employees and outside organizations. When rent free accommodation is admissible to some
employees, the same procedure will be followed, even though license fee will not be payable to
the person. It shall include charges towards Common Services, which may include providing
Lighting in Staircases and Common Areas, running the Lifts, and collecting & disposing Solid
Waste. This fee will be reviewed annually.
(2) House Rent Allowance (HRA): It is a payment made to each Employee each month, which comes
under the purview of the Allowances (other than Salary), as determined by the Government of
India from time to time.
(3) Additional Charges: These are monthly charges to be paid by the Allottee, in addition to the
License Fee. It consists of two parts, namely:
(a) Water Charges
Water service includes provision of water to each House. A flat-rate monthly charge or as
per consumption basis (on metering), as the case may be, for such service shall be payable by
each Allottee to the Institute; and
(b) Electricity Charges
Electricity service includes provision of electrical power to each House. A monthly charge
as per consumption basis (on metering) subject to a minimum consumption charges plus a
monthly fixed charge/meter rent, for such service shall be payable by each Allottee to the
Institute. The unit charges shall be determined separately, if the power supply is provided
using back-up generators.
(4) Specific Requirements: These are aspects that need to be complied with by each Allottee. These
include:
(a) The charges listed under items (1), (2) and (3) shall be determined from time to time by the
Office of Infrastructure Engineering, duly approved by the Competent Authority, and intimated
to all Employees of the Institute.
(b) The said charges will be deducted from the monthly salary of individual Allottee.
(c) The Institute may identify, from time to time, other charges that are payable by the Allottee to
the Institute duly approved by Competent Authority; the same will be intimated to all
Employees of the Institute.
(d) Furnishings: These are items that make the house functional. The Institute will provide only
unfurnished houses to the Allottee, and all furnishings required for personal stay should be
arranged by the Allottee;
(e) As per the Master Plan of the Permanent Campus of IIT Jodhpur, no Allottee shall be provided
with any personal gardening space. And, the Allottees shall not be charged for Horticulture &
Gardening in common areas, which will be arranged by the Institute;
(f) In special cases (such as providing furniture, appliances, or fixtures in Visiting Faculty
Housing, if any, as per the policy of the Institute), additional rent is payable to the Institute
by an Allottee for the said conveniences, which shall be determined by the Office of
Infrastructure Engineering, duly approved by the Competent Authority.
1.2 House Allotment Committee
The committee responsible for allotment of Houses, hereinafter called the House Allotment
Committee (HAC), shall be constituted by the Director with the following nominated members with
tenure of two (02) years.
(1) A Faculty Member : Chairman
(2) A Faculty Member : Member
(3) A Staff Member (Group B) : Member
(4) A Staff Member (Group A) : Member
(5) Estate Officer : Member-Secretary
The functions of the HAC are:
(1) Allot residences on campus under these rules;
(2) Recommend to the Director allotments in accordance with the provisions of these rules;
(3) Consider requests for out-of-turn allotment and make suitable recommendations in appropriate
cases for approval of the Director;
(4) Ensure proper utilization of the residences;
(5) Cancel allotment and recommend penal action against an Allottee, who breaches the HARs; and
(6) Consider and decide all other matters related to the Institute residences.
10
An appeal may be made to the Director through the Chairman, House Allotment Committee, against a
decision of the HAC. Such an appeal shall be submitted to the Chairman, House Allotment Committee,
within seven (07) days from the receipt of such decision from HAC. On receiving the appeal along
with the observations and recommendations of the Chairman, House Allotment Committee, the
Director shall exercise the power to resolve such appeals; the decision of the Director shall be final
and binding on the Allottee.
1.3 Period of Retention
The allotment shall be effective from the date on which possession thereof is taken by the
Employee. Further;
(1) The period of retention of a House shall be till the date of allotment, but expires as given
hereunder:
(a) The concessional period expires, which is permissible under these HARs, as under:
S.No. | Event Permitted | Conditions / Remark
Period
1 | On proceeding to take up 12 Any period beyond 12 months,
employment, elsewhere with the months | requires specific approval of
permission of Competent Authority, the Director on the
by retaining Lien on his/her post or recommendation of the HAC.
with Extraordinary Leave
2 Vacation or Leave of All Types Full
Period
3 Deputation or Training Full
Period
4 | Proceeding elsewhere under approved | Full
Exchange Program Period
5 | Death of Allottee 12 The accommodation is
Months | provided for bonafide use of
the Dependant Members of the
family of the deceased, only
for their occupancy during the
period.
6 | Retirement or Superannuation 04 In case of Faculty Members and
Months _ | Staff Members of the Institute
re-hired after the date of
superannuation, this period
will be reckoned from the date
of completion of such reappointment period.
7 Resignation, Dismissal, Removal or 03 This period will be counted
Termination of Service Months _ | from the date on which such
action comes into force.
(b) The allotment is cancelled under special circumstances by the Chairman, HAC, or is deemed
to have been cancelled under a provision in these HARs;
(c) The Employee surrenders the House; or
(d) The Employee ceases to occupy the accommodation for period more than 3 months, unless
permitted otherwise by the HAC.
(2) An Employee, who has surrendered the House allotted to him/her while proceeding or during
the period of leave/lien, may be allotted a House (if available) up to one month in advance of
the expected date of his/her returning to duty in the Institute;
(3) An Employee, at any time, may surrender a House allotted to him/her by giving a notice so as
to reach the HAC at least one month before the date of the vacation of the residence. The
11
allotment of the House shall be deemed to be cancelled with effect from the 31st day after the
day on which the letter is received by the HAC, or on the date specified in the letter, whichever
is later. If the Employee fails to give due notice, he/she shall be responsible for payment of
License Fee-cum-Rent for an additional 1 month from the date of vacating the House.
1.4 Code of Conduct of Allotees
(1)
(2)
(3) (4)
(5)
(8)
The Allottees of the Houses shall be bound by the following Code of Conduct:
The House is allotted to the Allottee only, which she/he can use for living by her/him and
her/his family. Any other person is not allowed to reside in the house. The Allottee shall vacate
the house, if she/he or his/her family is not staying in the house, the reason for which is duly
approved by the Institute;
The Allottee shall NOT
(a) Sublet (either partly or fully) the house allotted to him/her, or use the same for any
commerce, trade or business;
(b) Exchange mutually the houses with another Allottee;
(c) Undertake any alteration or addition to the structure of the house for any purpose
(including for keeping a car, scooter or any other item). On the other hand, the Institute may
undertake alterations and additions as it may deem necessary over time. In such cases, the
Allottees shall cooperate with the persons undertaking such activities;
(d) Undertake any civil, electrical or physical modifications, remove fixtures, or make any other
kind of modification (including changing colours of external wall; and creating of roofs,
structures, enclosures, shades and any such temporary / permanent installations);
(e) Rear milk cattle or any other cattle, either within the house or outside it;
(f) Tamper with the electric installations, water supply & sanitary fittings, or other fixtures
made available in the house provided by the Institute;
(g) Use electricity or water supplied to the house for any unauthorized purpose;
(h) Encroach upon any public space or floor space of neighbours house for gardening or for any
other purpose, either personal or professional;
(i) Cut or trim trees in the premises of the allotted house or on the Campus, or plant any trees
along the building line (even though soil cover may be available); and
(j) Store any illegal, explosive or inflammable material in the house.
If a complaint is received to this effect, and proved to be true, the matter will be treated as a
serious offence. Also, the Allottee shall be liable for penal or disciplinary action, or even be
liable to vacate the house within 1 month of the notification by the Institute;
The Allottee shall pay regularly all charges due, as prescribed by the Institute from time to time;
The house allotted is to the Allottee with a certain inventory of civil and electrical fixtures. Any
breakage in the fixtures shall be replaced by the Institute only, but the costs incurred towards
the same (including the service charges) shall be payable in full by the Allottee. The charges
payable shall be deducted from the salary of the Allottee in the ensuring month(s);
The Allottees can arrange to fix (at their own cost) air-conditioners in specific rooms of the
house. Only Split-type Air-Conditioners shall be permissible and the external unit shall be placed
only in the shaft provided for this purpose; the connecting wires & pipes from the interior unit to
the exterior unit, drain pipe, shall pass only through the earmarked route. The Dish TV Antenna
should be fixed only in the earmarked location of the building as per the direction of OIE;
The Allottee shall report immediately to the Office of Infrastructure Engineering any defects in
installations leading to wastage of water, or leakage of electricity, etc.;
The Allottees shall conduct themselves in a courteous and polite manner with the neighbours. If
any complaint is received on any Allottee (or a resident of the house provided to the Allottee)
for being quarrelsome or indulging in objectionable activities (like entertaining undesirable
characters, disorderly behavior, consuming liquour outside the house), appropriate disciplinary
action by the Competent Authority (including cancellation of allotment of the house); and
Any produce of the fruit or flower bearing trees on Campus shall be the property of the Institute.
12
Eligibility
This chapter presents the criteria for allotment of houses on campus.
2.1 Eligibility for a House on Campus
The following persons shall be eligible for three types of house (Types A, B and C) available
on Campus, as per entitlement:
(1) Regular and Contract Employees of the Institute;
(2) Visiting Faculty Members;
(3) Scholars-in-Residence; Emeritus Fellows, Scientists and Professors; and Post-Doctoral Fellows;
and
(4) Employees on Deputation.
Further:
(1) If both a person and his/her spouse are Employees of the Institute, then only one of them shall be
eligible for the allotment of house, based on their mutual choice regarding the type of house
they are eligible for;
(2) If an Employee is having a period less than one (01) year of service from the date of his
superannuation, then he/she shall not be eligible to apply for another type of residence; and
(3) All houses are chargeable; the Institute shall not allot rent free accommodation to any category
of Employee.
2.2 Eligibility of Employees Owning House
An Employee shall be eligible for allotment of a house on campus, even if she/he is owning
a house either in his/her own name or in the name of any member of his family in within the
jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation of Jodhpur, Jodhpur Development Authority or of any Municipality
adjoining the Karwad village.
2.3 Condition of Allotment and Rules of Occupancy
In addition to the provisions given in Chapter 1 of these HARs, the clauses given in this
section shall be applicable related to allotment and occupancy.
The Conditions of Allotment are:
(1) The Allottee is a licensee and not a tenant. The Institute reserves the right to terminate the license
at any time without assigning any reason. The intention of the parties to the license is that of
creating a mere license and nothing more, and at no point of time can the Allottee claim to be
the tenant of the premises allotted to him/her;
13
(2) No change of allotment of a house is permissible within the same category of housing on
Campus; unless otherwise approved by HAC based on very genuine or health reasons;
(3) When an Allottee is allotted a larger size house on Campus, the Allottee shall shift to the new
accommodation within 15 days of due date of occupancy, failing which the new allotment shall
be deemed to be cancelled. And, from the date he/she occupies the new accommodation, the
older accommodation is deemed to be cancelled. If the Allottee fails to vacate within the
stipulated period, the Allottee will be liable to pay Penal License Fee-cum-Rent, which is four times
that of the older accommodation for a minimum period of one month, with effect from the date
he/she took possession of the new accommodation, even if the Allottee is eligible for License
Fee-cum-Rent free accommodation;
(4) The Allottee who moves to the new house, shall give in writing in prescribed form (to the
Chairman, HAC) the details of date of vacation of old house and the date of occupying the new
house; and
(5) At the time of taking possession of the accommodation, the list of inventory of fittings and
fixtures in the allotted accommodation will be verified and signed by allottee in the book of
inventory kept for that purpose with the Office of Infrastructure Engineering. He/she shall be
responsible for damage of such items, except that which arises as a result of normal wear and
tear; the damage shall be determined by the Engineer In-Charge of the Office of Infrastructure
Engineering and approved by the Director, and the cost of damage shall be payable by the
Allottee.
The Rules of Occupancy are:
(1) After an Allottee vacates a house, the Secretary, HAC, shall arrange to perform the maintenance
works and colouring in the house, and then declare the house fit for occupation. The HAC shall
float the house only after the declaration is received;
(2) An Allottee shall give in writing his acceptance of the allotment within seven (07) days from the
date of receipt of the letter of allotment, failing which the allotment stands cancelled. The
Chairman, HAC, may condone delay in giving letter of acceptance, which must be submitted
before the allotment is cancelled;
(3) The date on which the Letter of Allotment is sent by eMail to the Allottee shall be considered as
the date of receipt of the same;
(4) The Allottee, who accepts the allotment, shall take possession of the allotted accommodation
within 15 days from the date of receipt of the allotment letter, failing which the allotment shall
stand cancelled on the 17 day, and he shall be charged License Fee-cum-Rent for a period of
entire full month in addition to that for the House in which he/she is residing. The Chairman,
HAG, shall be empowered to grant extension of the period of taking possession, where the
Allottee is out of station on official duty. In such cases, the maximum period of extension shall be
the number of days the Employee was out of station on official duty during the seven day period
mentioned above;
(5) If an Employee rejects the allotment in writing, does not communicate his/her acceptance, or it
is deemed cancelled under these HARs, the Allottee shall not be eligible for consideration for
another allotment for one year from the date on which the current allotment is made. In such a
case, he/she shall be charged flat penal License Fee-cum-Rent for a period of one month for the
house allotted;
(6) An Allottee, who takes possession of a house, cannot surrender the same and seek the older
house; and
(7) The Allottee shall:
(a) Report immediately to the Medical Officer of the Primary Health Center of the Institute about
contagious disease contacted by any member of the family in the house and shall take all
precautions as advised by the Medical Officer of the Institute;
(b) Keep the allotted house and its premises in hygienic and safe conditions at all times;
(c) Park motorized vehicles only in the formally allotted parking space for the respective house,
and non-motorized vehicles only in the designated space adjoining the building of the
house;
14
(d) Allow persons authorized by the Engineer In-Charge of the Office of Infrastructure Engineering
(including the employees of Contractors) to access to the house during 08:00-18:00 hours
(unless emergencies require access at other times beyond these hours), for the purpose of
carrying out repairs to the water-supply, sanitary installations, electrical fittings, and
fixtures (including furniture in select cases) in the house, as an when considered necessary;
(e) Report to the Office of Infrastructure Engineering, any damage or any defect in the building,
fittings & fixtures, or installations, immediately on noticing the same for necessary action;
and
(f) Allow the Security Officer of the Institute, the Medical Officer of the Primary Health Center,
Officers of Sanitation and Public Health of the Institute, to visit the allotted house during
08:00-18:00 hours (unless emergencies require access at other times beyond these hours). The
Allottee shall receive instructions to the on matters of official work of their respective Offices
and comply with the same;
(8) The Allottee shall NOT:
(a) Commit any act of nuisance or annoyance to any adjoining or neighboring the Allottee; and
(b) Use the house for immoral or illegal activities.
In all cases mentioned above, if the due date falls on a holiday, the immediate next working day will
be the due date for all purposes;
2.4 Seniority and Eligibility Criteria
For the purposes of allotment of a house, the seniority of the applicants from among the
Employees shall be determined by applying the criteria given below in serial order:
(1) A particular house can be allotted only to a person, who meets the GP/ AGP requirements stated
in Section 1.1 of these HARs; those with lower GP/ AGP (who do not meet this requirement)
cannot be allotted a house, even if there is no applicant from the entitled GP/ AGP; and
(2) Applicants shall be placed on a list in the order of their:
(a) Grade Pay or Academic Grade Pay; persons with higher GP/ AGP shall be senior to those with
lower GP/AGP, irrespective of their Basic Pay as on the date of announcement of
availability of the house;
(b) Effective Date of Joining a post (appointed either directly or through promotion) or date of
receiving the Grade Pay or Academic Grade Pay; persons with earlier date of joining shall be
placed above those with latter date;
(c) Personal File Number; persons with smaller PF Number shall be placed above those with
larger PF Number;
(d) Date of Joining the first post at the Institute (as a Visiting Faculty Member, a Faculty Member on
contract or probation, or as a Staff Member on contract or probation); persons who joined
earlier shall be placed above those who joined later.
The HAC shall prepare the Seniority List using details provided in the Application Form
submitted by the employees to the HAC after due verification from office of establishment, and
display the same along with the announcement for each category of vacant houses.
In case an Employee refuses allotment of a house on or before the deadline of acceptance or
rejection, the next person on the Seniority List shall be offered the house; the process will be
repeated till the entire Seniority List is exhausted.
15
16
3.
Process
This chapter presents the criteria for allotment of houses on Campus.
3-1 Normal Allotment
The normal process of allotment of houses shall be as below:
(1) Preparing the Vacant Houses
Once a house is vacated by an Employee, the Office of Infrastructure Engineering shall
undertake necessary repairs of civil & electrical infrastructure, painting and needed security
related repairs. This shall be done on priority, within a maximum period of 1 month. Once the
above works are completed, the Engineer In-Charge of the Office of Infrastructure Engineering shall
communicate that the said house is ready for occupation.
(2) Announcement of Vacant Houses
The HAC shall make an eMail announcement of houses fallen vacant and ready for
allotment; it shall attach the Application Form for the same.
(3) Receipt of Applications
Employees desirous of seeking a house on Campus shall apply by submitting a hard copy of
the Application Form (circulated eMail) indicating their preferences on or before the last date
indicated in the announcement. Employees shall place only those houses on the application,
which will be acceptable, if allotted.
(4) Preparation of Seniority List
The HAC shall prepare the Seniority List as per Section 2.4 of these HARs.
(5) Approvals for Allotment and Wait List
After the last date for filing the application for house allotment, the Secretary, HAC, shall
prepare a draft List of Allotment, along with a sufficient Wait List. Shortly, a meeting of the HAC
shall be held to discuss the same, and finalize the allotment.
(6) Allotment Order
After the meeting, the List of Allotment shall be prepared incorporating the inputs received
during the meeting. The Chairman, HAC, shall approve the same on behalf of the HAC, and the
Secretary, HAC, shall issue the Letters of Allotment in the prescribed format in duplicate to the
potential Allottees;
17
(7) Acceptance
The Allottees shall return one copy of the duly signed copy of the Letter of Allotment
confirming her/his acceptance, within 7 days from the date of receipt of the Letter of Allotment,
and take possession of the house within 15 days from the date of receipt of the Letter of
Allotment.
3.2 Out-of-Turn Allotment
The Director, suo moto, may allot 10% houses under his discretionary quota to any eligible
Employee of the Institute, or to meet the operational requirements of the Institute as may arise from
time to time; and freeze the allotment of a house or a group of houses in anticipation of joining of
new Faculty Members and Senior Officers of the Non-teaching Academic, Technical & Administrative
Cadres.
Employees can also request for allotment of house under Director’s Discretionary Quota, by
filing an application through proper channel. The HAC will examine such requests forwarded by
the Heads of Departments and the Highest Officers in charge of Non-teaching Academic, Technical &
Administrative Cadres; the Chairman, HAC, shall make specific recommendations, to the Director.
Further, the HAC may recommend Out-of-Turn Allotment under the special circumstances
under these rules and sent for the further approval of the Director. The basis of the recommendation
of the HAC shall be as below:
“The highest priority shall be assigned to functionaries, who discharge statutory responsibilities
and who are required to provide essential services round-the-clock. If type of houses is not
available immediately, which these functionaries are eligibility for, they shall be allotted the
available type of house. Subsequently, they can move to the type of house which they are
eligible for.”
3.3 Forfeiture of Allotment
A house, once allotted, shall be occupied by the Allottee in the as is condition, within 15 days
from the date of receipt of the Letter of Allotment, after duly vacating the previous house in which
he/she was residing. Failure to occupy the allotted house within the stipulated time shall result in
the automatic cancellation of the allotment. Further, the Allottee shall be debarred from applying for
any Institute residence for the next one year, excepting for transit accommodation.
3.4 Rejection of Allotment
If an Employee fails to accept the allotment of a residence within 07 days or fails to take
possession of that residence after acceptance within 15 days from the date of receipt of the Letter of
Allotment, he/she shall not be eligible for another allotment for one year from the date of the Letter
of Allotment.
3.5 Allotment to Employees Married to each other
The following norms apply to the Employee couples seeking a house on Campus:
(1) Only one of them, either the husband or the wife, shall be allotted the house, provided that they
are residing separately in pursuance of a valid order of judicial separation made by any Court;
(2) During the process of allotment, the applications by a husband and wife pair shall be considered
independently for allotment of houses;
(3) When two Employees, who are occupying separate houses duly allotted to each of them, decide
to get married to each other, they shall surrender one of the houses within one month of the
marriage. And, when one of the houses is not surrendered, the allotment of the house of the
lower type shall be deemed to have been cancelled on the expiry of the said period, and if the
18
two houses are of the same type, the allotment of one of these quarters, as the HAC may decide,
shall be deemed to have been cancelled on the expiry of such period;
19
20
4.
Special Situations
This chapter presents the treatment of special situations with regard to allotment of houses
on Campus.
4.1 Exemption of License Fee - cum - Rent
Normally, no employee of the Institute shall be provided any house free of charge. Also, the
house provided on the Campus shall be unfurnished and without any concession to the due License Fee
- cum - Rent to be paid by the Employee as per their eligibility. Any departure from this Rule shall
be duly approved by the Director.
4.2 Relaxation of Rules
The said rules may be relaxed in the following three cases:
(1) Temporary allotment of house(s) for purposes of marriage of the Members of the family of
Employees of the Institute;
(2) Allotment of houses to Officers who are differently-abled; and
(3) Allotment of houses for the purpose of medical emergencies.
In the above cases, the Institute may be guided by the relevant norms of the Government of India.
The Director shall approve such relaxations on the recommendation of the HAC.
21
22
5.
Maintenance
This chapter presents matters related to the maintenance of houses on Campus.
5.1 Upkeep and Cleanliness
The following are the conditions that need to be adhered to by the Allottees:
(1) Once a house is allotted to an Employee, the responsibility for upkeep, maintenance and
cleanliness of the house and its premises lies only with the Allottee;
(2) The Allottee shall take prior permission of the Institute for any structural modification required
to be made towards fixing and maintaining air-conditioners, water coolers, electrical appliances
or apparatus (which may require making holes, channels and ducts through the walls of the
house). The request seeking permission shall be sent to the Engineer In-Charge of the Office of
Infrastructure Engineering, at least one month before the work needs to begin, if permitted;
(3) The Institute may consider requests for replacing small electrical items (at no charge to the
Allottee), subject to the same being rendered dysfunctional by the regular use of the same, as
declared by the Engineer In-Charge of the Office of Infrastructure Engineering;
(4) The Allottees shall pay charges levied by the Institute from time to time, towards upkeep and
cleaning of:
(a) Common facilities and common areas adjoining the house; and
(b) Facilities towards lifts, lighting and any other common services made available in common
areas; and
(5) The Allottees shall attract penal charges for dropping of garbage out of the collection bins
provided for the purpose, not segregating the garbage as advised, and littering the premises; in
extreme cases, the Institute may consider initiating penal action.
5.2 Alterations and Modifications
The Institute shall NOT approve any alterations and modifications, creation of windows
spaces, etc., that are in violation of the approved Campus Master Plan. Also, no Allottee shall make
any change herself/himself to the house (its structure, its finishes, or its civil, electrical &
mechanical fixtures).
In exceptional cases, subject to valid justification and recommended Engineer In-Charge of the
Office of Infrastructure Engineering of the Institute, the Institute may authorize the Allottee in writing
to undertake small modifications inside the house, which may make the building structurally
unsafe, deform the buildings, cause seepage, result in short circuiting, deface the exterior of the
buildings. These acts of jeopardising the overall safety, durability, facade and functionality of the
building, and affecting the comfort of neighbouring residents, shall be grounds for the Institute to
take penal action.
23
Limited amount of modifications, like fixing coolers, air conditioners, and water heaters,
which require involving casing and capping, cutting of the wall, creation of ducts and channels,
shall be arranged by the Institute, as a onetime exercise at the time of allotment of the house, but
before occupying the same.
24
6.
Violations
This chapter presents matters related to the Violations by the Allottees of houses on
Campus.
6.1 Overstay
Any overstay shall not be permitted in the house beyond the permitted duration. Any
unauthorised overstay in the house shall attract levying of higher rate of License Fee-cum-Rent and
penal charges as below:
(1) After an allotment has been cancelled or is deemed to be cancelled under any provisions
contained in these HARs, where the house remains or had remained in occupation of the
Allottee or of any person claiming through him/her, such Employee shall be liable to pay
damages for use and occupation of the residence, services and furniture, of four times all charges
he/she was paying;
In the event of death of the Allottee, his/her family may be permitted by the Institute under
exceptional circumstance to retain the house for a further period of 9 months over and above the
normal concessional period of retention (of 3 months) on payment of twice all charges payable
for up to a maximum of 9 months. This extended period of retention shall not be admissible,
when a dependant of the deceased Employee owns a house anywhere in the country; and
When an Allottee:
(a) Sublets/shares unauthorizedly the house, wholly or partly;
(b) Charges License Fee-cum-Rent from the Employee sharing the house at a rate which is
considered excessive;
(c) Creates any unauthorized structure in any part of the residence;
(d) Uses the house or a part of it for any purpose other than for which it is meant;
(e) Tampers with the electrical, civil or water connections and meters;
(f) Fixes the DTH TV antenna at locations other than the designated ones;
(g) Commits any other breach of rules or violates any of the Terms & Conditions of allotment;
(h) Conducts him/herself in a manner which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmonious
relations with the neighbors; or
(i) Has knowingly furnished incorrect information in any application or false written
statements with a view to securing the allotment;
the Institute without prejudice to any other disciplinary action that may be taken against
him/her, cancel the allotment of the residence. For the purpose of this sub-rule, the term
Employee includes, unless the context otherwise requires, himself/herself, a member of his/her
family, or any person claiming through him/her.
25
Where action to cancel the allotment is taken on account of unauthorized sub-letting or
unauthorized sharing of the house by the Allottee, the HAC can take a decision on merit of the case,
and further refer the case, if required, to the Housing Allotment Disciplinary Committee (HADAC) as
per the provisions given in Chapter 6.6 of these HARs.
6.2 Unauthorized occupation
A person residing in a house or occupying a garage allotted with the house shall be deemed
to be unauthorized occupant, under any one, or the following circumstances:
(1) The house, garage or both are occupied without allotment;
(2) The Allottee has violated of any of the Code of Conduct specified in these HARs;
(3) A duly allotted house is retained beyond the allotted period without prior permission, or if the
permission is refused; and
(4) Penal License Fee-cum-Rent, wherever applicable, is not paid.
On a complaint received against any occupant regarding violation under these rules, the
occupant will be served a notice to offer his/her comments in writing on the complaint within
seven (07) days from the receipt of such notice. Also punitive actions may be taken after serving a
Show Cause Notice to be replied within seven (07) days from the receipt of such notice, in case of
unsatisfactory reasons or response.
A person declared to be an unauthorised occupant shall be liable to punitive action specified
under these rules, besides any disciplinary action as per the Institute Statutes/Rules applicable in
case of Institute Employees:
(1) If the person declared an unauthorised occupant, is not an Institute Employee, the Institute shall
take action as per prevalent law with the appropriate municipal & judicial authorities vested
under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act 1971; and
(2) If the person, to whom the residence (or a part of it) is sublet, is also an Institute Employee,
he/she would be liable to disciplinary action as per Rules of the Institute. In addition, punitive
action under these rules may also be taken against such persons.
For the purposes of these HARs, the service of notice shall be deemed to be sufficient for all
purposes, if it is sent by eMail, once under registered post or issued by hand on the address of the
house concerned.
Such complaint along with the comments or replies, if any, made by the concerned
occupant, shall be referred to the HAC. After considering the complaints and the comments, if any,
the HAC may drop the complaint, if satisfied with the comments or replies. But, if the HAC is not
satisfied with such comments or replies, then it shall refer the same to the Housing Allotment
Disciplinary Committee (HADAC) for an enquiry. If the HADAC finds the complaint to be valid and
the comments unconvincing for reasons to be recorded, then the person concerned shall be given a
notice to vacate the premises within 15 days from the date of such notice. In such a case, the said
occupant shall be liable to all punitive actions as provided for under unauthorized occupation
under these rules.
For violating rules of the Code of Conduct, the Allottee will tender him/herself liable to
disciplinary action as per Rules of the Institute, in addition to other punitive actions provided under
these HARs or any other law in force in the country.
26
6.3 Breach of Rules and Conditions
The HAC may, without prejudice to any other disciplinary action that may be taken against
him/her, cancel the allotment of the residence, if an Allottee:
(1) Sublets the house unauthorisedly, charges License Fee-cum-Rent from the other Employee
sharing the house,
(2) Erects any unauthorized structure in any part of the house,
(3) Uses the residence or any portion thereof for purposes other than that for which it is meant,
(4) Tampers with the electricity or water connection,
(5) Commits any other breach of rules or other Terms & Conditions of the allotment,
(6) Uses the house or garage or permits or offers it to be used for any purposes, which the HAC
considers to be improper,
(7) Conducts him/herself in a manner which, in his/her opinion, is prejudicial to the maintenance
of harmonious relations with his/her neighbors,
(8) Conducts him/herself in such a manner as to disturb peace in the residential zone or campus in
any manner or utilizes or cause to be utilized common facilities for unauthorised purposes (such
as parties without the consent of Engineer In-Charge of the Office of Infrastructure Engineering),
(9) Has knowingly furnished incorrect information in any application or written statement with a
view to securing the allotment.
Further:
(1) If an Allottee sublets a residence allotted to him/her or any portion thereof or any of the
outhouses, garages or stables appurtenant thereto in contravention of these rules, he may,
without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against him/her, be charged such
damages from the date of cancellation of allotment as may be fixed by the Institute from time to
time in this respect;
(2) Where action to cancel the allotment is taken on account of sub-letting of the house by the
Allottee, a period of 7 days shall be allowed to the Allottee, and any other person residing with
him/her therein to vacate the premises. The allotment shall be cancelled with effect from the
date of vacation of the premises or expiry of the period of 7 days from the date of the orders for
the cancellation of the allotment, whichever is earlier;
(3) Where the allotment of a residence is cancelled for conduct prejudicial to the maintenance of
harmonious relationship with neighbors, the Allottee, at the discretion of the HAC, may be
allotted another residence in the same class at any other place;
(4) The HAC shall be competent to take all or any of the actions under these rules, and also to
declare the Allottee ineligible for allotment of a house for the remaining period of his/her
service, and the HAC shall intimate the Competent Authority for initiating disciplinary
proceedings for major penalty under the relevant rules;
(5) Where any penalty under this rule is imposed by the HAC, the aggrieved Employee, may,
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the orders by him/her, file a representation to the Head of
Department concerned; such persons shall be heard in person on the date intimated by the
concerned Competent Authority or by the Housing Allotment Disciplinary Action Committee
(HADAC) in such orders. And, the original order imposing the penalty shall stand, unless it is
modified or rescinded by the Competent Authority as a result of the representation.
6.4 Punitive Actions
The HADAC on conducting an enquiry can recommend for suitable punitive action for
unauthorized occupation or violation of general Code of Conduct applicable to the Employees under
these rules as follows:
(1) An unauthorized occupant will be liable to eviction by the HAC under Section 3 of the Public
Premises (Eviction of unauthorized occupants) Act 1971(Act No. 49 of 1971);
(2) For the period of unauthorized occupation, the person will be charged penal License Fee-cumRent, which will be as per the norms laid down by the Institute from time to time. Such penal
License Fee-cum-Rent shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a charge on the salary. The
27
Institute shall be entitled to deduct or set-off such penal License Fee-cum-Rent from Pension or
any other amount due to the Employees due to him/her; and
(3) The Institute may disconnect the electricity, water and/ or Institute telephone, (if any provided
in the concerned premises) at any time after the service of 15 days’ notice as provided under
these rules; and
(4) In addition to the provisions in these rules, the Competent Authority may take disciplinary action
in accordance with the relevant statues, rules and laws enacted by the Parliament of India.
6.5 Sub-letting
No Employee shall sublet the whole or part of the house allotted to him/her.
But, an Allottee proceeding on leave may accommodate in the house any other Employee
(who is not allotted a house on campus) as a Caretaker, for the duration of the retention period as
specified in these rules, but not exceeding six months in any case, unless explicitly approved by the
Competent Authority with prior permission of the Engineer In-Charge of the Office of Infrastructure
Engineering. Further, during this period, the Allottee shall remain personally responsible for any
License Fee-cum-Rent payable in respect of the house and for any damage caused to the house or its
precincts (and grounds or services) provided therein by Institute beyond fair wear and tear.
6.6 Housing Allotment Disciplinary Action Committee
The complaints related to unauthorised occupation and violation of general Code of Conduct
by the Allottee of the house on campus should be referred to the following Housing Allotment
Disciplinary Action Committee (HADAC):
(1) Coordinator (Faculty) : Chairman
(2) Chairman (HAC) : Member
(3) Security Officer : Member
(4) Registrar : Member-Secretary
The Committee will be a Standing Committee of the Institute.
The Terms & Conditions of the Committee are:
(1) The Committee should meet immediately on receiving the complaint on unauthorised
occupation of the house on campus, and on violation of general Code of Conduct applicable to the
Employees, and examine the same in the light of the charges made, notices issued by the HAC,
the custodian of the house and the responses received from the unauthorised persons resorting
to violation of general Code of Conduct;
(2) The Committee shall conduct an enquiry summoning the delinquent to depose and make
suitable recommendations in accordance with the Institute rules or The Public Premises (Eviction
of unauthorized occupants) Act 1971, if found guilty; and
(3) The Committee shall submit its report along with its recommendations for disciplinary action,
including eviction of the premises as per law in force.
28
/.
Resolution of Matters
This chapter presents matters related to the Resolution of Matters in case of allotment of
houses on Campus.
7-1 Appellate Authority
The Director of IIT Jodhpur, will be the Appellate Authority for all purposes on the decisions
of the HAC, in case of any grievance arising out of the implementation and interpretation of these
rules. The decisions pronounced by the Director shall remain final and binding.
7.2 Rules, Procedures and Matters not covered
All rules and procedures and disciplinary provisions applicable in respect of Government of
India owned public premises shall be applicable in respect of IIT Jodhpur employees and persons
for utilising the official residences and premises of IIT Jodhpur also, wherever specific rules are not
framed. 