Welcome To The Department of Chemical Engineering
Translation of molecular information into discovery of new products and processes with Industry 4.0+ 
Vision & Mission of the Department
To become a globally recognized department of chemical engineering through its contribution in emerging and demand-driven areas with multidisciplinary approach.   

The Department of Chemical Engineering offers under-graduate (B.Tech.) and post-graduate (M.Tech., M.Tech.-Ph.D. and Ph.D.) programs in chemical engineering. Through the academic programs, the department is making a conscious effort to establish itself as a leading institute in the new genre of chemical engineering education. The program involves traditional courses, emerging areas and specialisations such as process engineering intelligence, molecular engineering and sustainability.

In line with the new education policy, B.Tech. (Chemical Engineering) students will have unique opportunity and flexibility for:

Minor in (a)Management (b)Entrepreneurship (c)Data Science
Five year B.Tech.+M.Tech./ MBA
One year Engineering Innovation opportunity


Traditionally, chemical engineering teaching focuses on subjects like material and energy balance, transport phenomena, thermodynamics, mass transfer, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, chemical reaction engineering, numerical analysis, computational systems, biotechnology, petroleum-petrochemicals, polymers and safety engineering. With the advent of the era of Industry 4.0 in chemical companies, artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), data analytics, internet of things (IoT), molecular engineering, nano-composites; the discipline is being transformed by the incorporation of new emerging technologies and demand-driven areas.

The department is keen on collaboration with industry and academia worldwide. At present, Chemical Engineering Department is sharing its expertise with the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (DDWS), Ministry of Jal Shakti; Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ministry of Defence; International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) etc. Department has signed MoU with the industries for providing consultancy services. Department is also actively involved in Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR) through Unnat Bharat Abhiyan (UBA) and other societal initiatives.

Department has research interest in core and emerging areas; and is looking for faculty members in different areas of chemical engineering. Prospective candidates are encouraged to visit our recruitment page and apply.